////
vim:set ft=asciidoc noet tw=72:
////
cryptmount(8)
=============

Name
----
cryptmount - parse *crypttab* for use by *cryptsetup*

Synopsis
--------
*cryptmount* ['options'] [*-L*]

*cryptmount* ['options'] *-M* ['name'|'device']

*cryptmount* ['options'] *-M* 'name' 'device' ['key']

*cryptmount* ['options'] *-U* ['name'[*,*...]]

Description
-----------

*cryptmount* uses *crypttab(5)* for calling *cryptsetup(8)*; it can also
be used to define a 'volume' on the command line without *crypttab*.

Actions
-------

*-L*::

List the 'names' (first column) of 'volumes' from *crypttab*. Use with
*-O* to manipulate which 'names' are listed.

*-M*::

Perform a mapping. The first form of this command finds a 'volume' from
*crypttab* either by its 'name' or 'device', or if nothing is given then
map all 'volumes' (use with *-O* to manipulate which 'volumes' are
mapped). The second form defines a 'volume' entirely on the command
line, *crypttab* is not used.

*-U*::

Unmap 'volume(s)'. If a list of 'names' is given, unmap them. Otherwise
unmap all 'volumes' from *crypttab* (with *-O* to manipulate which
'volumes' are unmapped).

Options
-------

*-c* 'file'::

Override the default *crypttab* location.

*-f*::

Force potentially destructive mappings. For plain mappings (which are
used with the *swap* and *tmp* options), there is a lot of potential to
accidentally lose data. Because of this, *cryptmount* performs a check
with *blkid(8)* to see if there is anything identifiable on 'device'.
Use *-f* to bypass this check.

*-w* 'num'::

Time (in seconds) to wait for 'device' if it is not already available.
If *udevd(8)* is not running, then *cryptmount* does not bother to wait
and this option is a no-op. This also affects the wait time for
'keydevice' if your key is a block device or a file on a block device.

*-n*::

Dry run, useful with *-v* to see how *cryptsetup* will be called.

*-v*::

Increase verbosity. This prints the commands which are being called (eg:
*cryptsetup*, *mkswap*).

*-q*::

Decrease verbosity.

*-h*::

Print a short usage message and exit.

*-o* 'options'::

An options list with items such as *swap*, *cipher*, etc. This may be
given multiple times with a cumulative effect. See *crypttab(5)* for the
full syntax 'options'.

*-O* 'filters'::

Similar to 'options', this is used to manipulate which 'volumes' are
used with '-L' and with '-M'/'-U' without arguments. If an option is
present in 'filters', then the 'volume' in *crypttab* must contain the
option. For example *-O swap,size* matches all 'volumes' with the *swap*
option *and* any *size=*'size' option; or *-O swap,size=512* matches
only those 'volumes' with the *swap* option and specifically *size=512*.
+
A filter option may also be negated by prefixing it with a *!*. For
example, *-O swap,!size* includes all 'volumes' with the *swap* option
but *without* the 'size' option. There is a built-in filter *!noauto*.
+
Filters are especially useful with *%*'tag' options. For example, *-O
!%random* can be used to map all 'volumes' which don't use
*/dev/urandom* for a password and *-O %random* to map the remainder once
your system's random seed has been restored.
+
The *-O* option has *no effect* when calling *cryptmount* in a way that
does not use *crypttab*.

See Also
--------
*crypttab*(5), *cryptsetup*(8)

Authors
-------
Matt Monaco <dgbaley27@0x01b.net>
